My Data Journey … so Far


Now that I have actually been working as a Data Analyst for 6 months, I have had a lot of time to reflect on my journey to get here.  From starting in Law School and moving into Compliance within the Defense Industry to ending up doing Data for a Delivery Startup, a lot of my journey has been unpredictable and is always a conversation starter with colleagues and friends. As you might imagine there are not too many lawyers who decide to restart their career in Data or Programming. But nonetheless, I am here now! Not yet a data scientist, but sort of on the way and certainly working with Data! Hopefully I can break down some of my experiences and decisions in a way that might help anyone reading this make a similar decision, but also, to help me understand the decisions better myself. Maybe writing this will allow me to really get a better plan going for the next few months, or even years. Enjoy!

My career trajectory was, initially, very much based on my Law degree. But between us, the main reason I ended up in this subject was that I thought Suits was a stellar TV show (at that point only the first 3 seasons had come out) and I didn’t get into any schools I liked for Economics which had historically been a much stronger interest. Regardless, university in the UK was an OK time, I didn’t really gel with anything specific, but I got it done, if in a slightly longer time frame than usual. In my final year I did a small internship in a legal support function for a tiny startup. That company relocated and I found a full time position as a Compliance Officer for an ex-Airbus entity called Hensoldt. This was a company in the Defense industry and had a very heavy focus on bulletproof compliance. As you might imagine, I spent the next year and a half listening to my department be referred to as the Business Bottleneck and the revenue reducing team. Nevertheless, I quite enjoyed the immediate responsibility I received and serious projects I got to work on. However, Compliance, not really a passion of mine, but I didn’t really have a large desire to move somewhere specific yet. All that changed pretty quickly. 

I started a project  focusing on automating and standardizing the elements of Compliance that did not require human involvement. It required parallel development of a variety of skills and the ability to conceptualize and map a single framework for a system that contained a large amount of unrelated data. Keep in mind that the extent of my programming knowledge at this point was a shabby Pacman game made in Scratch. This project captivated me, partially because of the subject matter, but also because I really enjoyed working with the few tech savvy people I had at my disposal. It was infinitely more creative and I was entranced by the idea of Creating something! After starting my career doing document review, drafting and reporting the possibility to visualize and implement a solution that would literally replace the need for human interfacing was beautiful. After a few weeks of genuinely being excited to go to work, I started considering how I could make this a part of my day-to-day life. 

Naturally, my first instinct was to consider evolving my role within the company, but that was met with resistance, a few empty promises and little opportunity to pivot into it and rather a desire to tag it onto my existing role (I was pretty sick as a Compliance officer). My partner at the time happened to know about coding academies, about these hyper concentrated short term bootcamps that took you from zero to hero and got you employed within the industry! They were expensive, but it was an investment. I spent the next month going to intro events, coding 101 classes, getting a feel for the various academies that were available in London at the time. I knew I wanted to do a full-time in person course (i.e. quit my job) but I was torn between Software Engineering and Data Science. But having decided on Flatiron School I went to their project showcases for Data Science and Software Engineering and I was so impressed by the Data Science projects. Every other project showcased was something that resembled products that were the reason I wanted to go into this field. 

So anyway, I do the interviews, entrance tests, I sign up for everything, get a start date and welcome pack sent to me, and then Covid-19 hits. The course was being postponed until clarity was received from the government) so I was offered to move to a Self-Pace program. At the time I felt I didn’t have much of an option, since I had already left my job, so I signed up for it. In retrospect, I should have known that I was not well equipped for the Self-Paced approach. To give you some background, my course deadline has been extended by a few months and I am still going to be racing against the clock here. Howeverrr, in my defence, I have been working for the past 6 months, so my focus dropped off the course for a while. 

After really struggling to keep working regularly during the Covid lockdown and the first time in my life that I had really no fixed obligations (and getting a dog) I was very not diligent. After a while I decided that it was a better idea to just find a job in the area so I can practice the things I’m learning in tandem with learning new things. This worked well for the first few weeks, but then my current role really exploded and I almost quadrupled my coverage over night and I ended up working 60 hour weeks. The learning curve was steep at the start, but has recently plateaued, driving my re-focus on Data Science and education in general. And now, I am a few hours from presenting another Module Project (check it out here) and I am hopeful that I can keep my learning curve steep enough to keep life interesting. 

Now to tell you a bit more about the job I do now and what I think will happen from here. I am a Regional Operations Data Analyst for a Spanish delivery company called Glovo. We are still considered a startup despite having more than 4,000 employees right now. When I joined the company 6 months ago, that number was 2,000! We are still experiencing explosive growth despite being unprofitable and facing regulatory headwinds. I work primarily with SQL, Excel, and Looker to drive more basic Data Insights. I have yet to implement and Statistical models into my analysis. I thought this role to be an amazing base to really understand the structure of data and how to clean and prepare it before really delving deep into Machine Learning and Data Science. I already have a few projects planned to try and improve some general processes of the company. A lot of this sits in Data Science, but a larger part focuses on the automation of processes that otherwise take people a lot of time to do fundamentally basic processes. And from there, hopefully, I can find a role either in the company or elsewhere that allows me to be more creative in problem solving and really focus on problem solving rather than just identifying KPIs. 

Hopefully, as time goes on, I will remember to add to this entry, to track how my work is going. Maybe once I finish the course at Flatiron I can do a second blog post focused on what actually ended up happening in the next month, and focusing more heavily on what it is that I do as a Data Analyst. I think there is still a lot of misinformation about the complexity of work done by analysts. It is really not very hard, especially when compared to some of the more intricate elements of Software Engineering and DS. 

Thank you!
